---
layout: doc
title: Constraint CSS
tag: ccss
source: "https://github.com/the-gss/ccss-compiler"
---
The [Constraint Cascading Style Sheets](http://www.cs.washington.edu/research/constraints/web/ccss-uwtr.pdf) (CCSS), based on the Badros and Borning paper, are the base layer powering GSS.

With CCSS you can define a series of constraints dealing with the dimensions and position of DOM elements.

For example, the following constraint would specify that the width of two buttons has to be the same:

```
#button1[width] == #button2[width];
```

You could also use numeric values:

```
#button1[height] == 60;
```

## Defining constraints

Constraints are given by using various dimensions of elements. The elements are chosen using standard [CSS selectors](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/CSS/Getting_started/Selectors).

The currently supported dimensions of an element are:

* `width` (shorthand: `w`)
* `left` (shorthand: `x`)
* `right` *read-only*
* `centerX` *read-only*
* `height` (shorthand: `h`)
* `top` (shorthand: `y`)
* `bottom` *read-only*
* `centerY` *read-only*

## Equality operators

The usual way of utilizing CCSS is to define rules for positions and sizes of various elements in relation to other elements.

The supported equality operators are:

* `==` exactly equal
* `<=` less than or equal
* `>=` greater or equal
* `<` less than
* `>` greater than

For example, to place two items side-by-side horizontally, you could state a constraint like:

```
#button1[left] >= #button2[right];
```

*Note:* this constraint doesn't affect the sizes or the vertical positioning of the elements. Insert additional constraints for these or use [VFL](/docs/vfl).

## Mathematical operators

In addition to direct equalities, you can also apply mathematical operations. For example, you could use this rule to make the first button 100 pixels taller than the second button:

```
#button1[height] == #button2[height] + 100
```

## Constraint strengths

There are many situations where not all of your constraints can be resolved together. In these situations you have to be able to do some trade-offs, and define constraints that don't always have to hold true.

This can be achieved with constraint strengths. If you don's specify a strength with a constraint, it will be considered `required`.

For example:

```
/* We'd like for the button to be at least 100px taller than the other */
#button1[height] >= #button2[height] + 100 !weak;
/* But it shouldn't be taller than the toolbar itself */
#button1[height] <= #toolbar[height] !strong;
```
